with Mr. Fred Jaggi, Dr. Fred Jaggi. Today's date
is February 7th, 1980. This is interview number
two. This is Terry Anderson.
This is our second interview with Dr. Fred Jackie.
Today's date is Thursday, February 7, 1980. In
1937,
you were appointed head of the newly established
Department of Veterinary and Hygiene, a post
which you had until 1949. Why did they pick you?
Well, I don't know. They'd never had anything like
that, and they were expanding these. School of
Veterinary Medicine at the time, and there was a
need for
a department they called Veterinary Hygiene.
Whether that's a good term or not was
questionable. What exactly does it mean?
Well, that's it. What does it mean? They argued
that.
Lots of them said it didn't make any sense and
whatnot. And finally, it evolved into veterinary
public health. What they actually tried to, well,
make it was veterinary subjects related to human
health. For example? Like milk hygiene, meat
hygiene, and that type of thing. And that disease
is transmissible from animal to man. But the
choice of veterinary hygiene seemed to not fit the
bill. So eventually it was changed. Why did they
affect you? I don't know. They were looking for
somebody, and I was in practice. I guess they
couldn't find anybody else. That's the only thing
I know. How can you account for expansion during
the Depression? 1937 was a bad year in American
history. Well, I had nothing to do with the
accounting for it. I was employed during the
Depression, which is getting towards the tail end
of the Depression. And I was in practice there in
Beaumont and working for the city doing food
hygiene work. So I guess they were scouting around
for somebody. Could you Explain your duties as the
head of the department, teaching and research and
things like that. No, I didn't do any research. I
did develop courses in milk hygiene, meat
hygiene, and I did the meat inspection at the meats
laboratory over in the animal husbandry
department.
How about teaching? I taught a little of
everything. Of course, the two courses I
mentioned, and then I also taught infectious
diseases,
large animal infectious diseases, and I'd fill in
teaching non-infectious diseases, obstetrics,
or what have you, for other departments where they
had conflicts because they were short-handed.
And sometimes they'd have conflicts or
overloads, and I would teach some of these other
courses. I'd assist with the operative surgery.
because the classes had gotten pretty big by then,
and Dr. Leonard was teaching surgery, and then in
the laboratory when they were doing their
laboratory work, I'd help with the surgery. I'd
help him with his surgery so we could give more
individual attention to the students. One man
with about 30 men doing surgery could very well
supervise, so I helped him with that. One other
course I didn't mention, I also taught a course for
agricultural students in animal hygiene.
I have a question about your job as the head of
Veterinarian Hygiene. You had that position from
1937 to 1949, 12 years. What changes did you
witness during those years in that department?
Well, I guess one thing, we finally got a
laboratory where we could do what laboratory work
we needed to do with meat and milk, hygiene, and
outside of that,
during the war and after the war, since we went
year-round,
didn't have too many changes, except we had to
double up on our teaching. Every subject was
taught every term, and consequently,
we were too busy to do make too many changes. Well
what about them thinking about changes as far as
the course load? Did it increase or decrease? Or as
far as the curriculum, were there new courses
offered that hadn't been offered before? Or as far
as new people being hired, was there an increase in
faculty during those years under your direction?
Oh yeah, not under my direction, no. But in the
veterinary school there was an increase.
departments were well divided up to make other
departments. In other words, parasitology
became a department, and it recently was part of
another department. I've forgotten what they
called it now, but the man that taught
parasitology also taught
histology and pathology and food hygiene, and
then they divided the, divided it up, made it a
department of parasitology, which took some of
the load off of that.
I was trying to think now, Anatomy stayed like it
was, but they employed two, three more people, a
couple more people, and
pathology was pulled out into a department, and
microbiology was pulled out into a department.
Now, why were they? Why were these changes? Why
were they? Yeah. Why did these changes come about?
Because had more students, too many students, and
had need for more faculty.
And it was expansion. That's it. Now during of
course 1941 and 1945, this nation was consumed in
the Second World War. I was wondering what was it
like being at Texas A&M, and especially in the
School of Medicine during the Second World War?
Well on campus, we had lots of lots of servicemen.
They had, they were there for short periods of
time. In other words, with the teaching them
something on an intensive basis, and most of us in
veterinary school had nothing to do with that. We
did have some students that were, I've forgotten
what they called it now, Student Army Training
Corps, something of that nature. Different from
the Corps of Cadets, huh? Yes, yes. and these were
to go into the service as soon as they graduated,
and we had some of them. Now, in the veterinary
school, we did not have many in the Corps of Cadets.
Most of them were
non-military students, I guess you'd call them,
because a good many of them were were older or
didn't have time really to enter into a bunch of
extracurricular activities. I shouldn't say
extracurricular because military science
wouldn't be, but most of them were, you might say,
civilian students,
and I don't know what else I can say about that.
Did the living conditions decline in any way
because of the war and because of the material
needed for the war? No, it didn't affect the
veterinary school much, any. How about the
general funding? Was the support for the
veterinarian school decreased and shifted other
ways, or did you get a feeling that the
administration thought that veterinarian
medicine was now at least as important or as
important as it had been before the war?
Well, I think they,
as it became more popular and more students or more
individuals wanted to take veterinary medicine,
I think they did become an awareness of the
importance of veterinary medicine, or that it was
more important than they had thought at one time.
course it goes back a long ways where they used to
talk about the farriers being the veterinarians
and so on, and but it became a little more respected
and
recognized as time went on, and as the curriculum
became more exact and not so broad and not just
clinical
subjects, but as I went into research and that sort
of thing, became specialized
in certain cases. like poultry diseases and
things of that nature, why it did become better
recognized.
And because we had such a, well, it was a tough
curriculum, it was respected to
a large extent on that account.
Beyond that, I don't know anything I can tell you.
Okay, I was thinking about the Second World War and
the effect that there must, the war itself must
have had some effect or the immediate post-war
situation must have had some effect on, on the
School of Veterinary Medicine. Do you, do you
think it did or?
I don't know how to analyze that. Obviously, it did
have some effect because the men, as they
graduated, most of them got commissions and went
into the service, and then a lot of those finally
served their
years in the service and reached retirement and
came back out, some of them to teach and some of them
to go into other lines of work that they had become
proficient in in the service. So, it had its
effect. I don't know that I could put my finger on it
and say it affected this in such and such a way, but
certainly in the case of
the Department of Veterinary Hygiene, it had lots
of effect because the veterinarians that went
into the service, a big part of them, were
hygienists.
And then they came out and a lot of them, while they
were in the service, got a Masters of Public
Health, and some even beyond that, and so there
became an awareness of the importance of the
veterinarian as far as food hygiene was
concerned. So it had an effect on this department
in that respect.
Now probably in other departments it wasn't as
noticeable.
In 1936, right before you came here, in order to get
into Veterinarian Medicine, School of
Veterinarian Medicine, one needed 15 hours of
pre-professional work, and in 1975 that was
increased to 66 hours of pre-professional work.
Why is that? Why were the requirements so small,
and now why are they so much larger?
I guess it's because of the development of more
research, the things that have caused these
subjects to become more technical, and because
medicine, knowledge of medicine has increased in
the last 20 years to the extent that it takes more
training to fit into the niche. And has this
increase in requirements to get into the School of
Vet and Medicine had, have you seen any difference
between the students, or does it make better
students, or? Do you have any idea on that? Does it
make better veterinarians? Is it worthwhile?
Well, it should. All I can say is it should. Bear in
mind that I've been out of the field for 15 years.
Yeah, of course. And there's been tremendous
strides since I retired from college veterinary
medicine. And consequently, those men are
definitely better trained than those before
them. So,
well, there's been, I know when I first
came to the college there,
Practically all the drugs we used were just basic
drugs, and finally sulfanilamides came on, and
then antibiotics, and all that type of thing has
had a tremendous influence on what and how you
teach.
In other words, we used to use arsenic in one form or
another for this and that and the other, and most of
those basic drugs now that were a lot of mineral, a
lot of plant extracts, have been replaced by other
things, maybe synthetics in some cases.
and there's been tremendous strides in the
knowledge of surgery and orthopedics and that
sort of thing. So, they have to be better trained.
Now, whether as individuals they're any better is
something else, but at least their training is
much better than it used to be. Now, during your
almost 30 years at the College of Veterinary
Medicine, did you feel during that time, if you can
reflect on this, that the students, the incoming
first-year students, were better students, more
knowledgeable students than those in the 1930s?
Well, yes, because we got to the point where we
screened them. And then it became more or less
competitive. We had more applicants than we could
take, and so we'd interview them, and in various
ways we would rank them, and consequently a lot of
them never got in. The ones we thought
were not up to par. What was the criteria for
ranking these students and, for example, in the
interview? Well, a big part of it was their
pre-veterinary record. Yeah. And then the rest,
we tried to try to determine background and desire
or why they wanted veterinary medicine, and the
type of practice they wanted to go into, and
then, let's say, just
opinion of the selection committee. Each one,
each one would, would rank them. and then you'd get
a composite, and here you'd come up with a figure.
Did you think that system worked well? Yes, it did
at that time. It's been changed a lot since then. In
what way? I don't know. All I know is it's been
changed a lot. See, I haven't had any contact with
it. In 1962, before you retired, 180 students
applied for vet school, and today somewhere
around 600 students are applying for vet school.
There seems to be a great new interest in becoming a
veterinarian. Why do you think that is? Do you have
any opinions on that? Well, I think probably for
one thing, as we got more graduates, out into the
field, and because of numbers, and we feel they
were all good men, and had more influence in their
community that
lots of boys or girls or lots of students, let's
call them, thought it was fascinating. that the
profession was fascinating, and they wanted to go
into it. Now it used to be that practically all of
them went into large animal practice, and then the
small animal was sidelined. Now there's a
predominance of small animal practitioners
where they can live in the city and have lots of
conveniences that the large animal practitioner
didn't have in the small community.
And of course the
passing of the horse had a lot to do with it.
So there's been lots of influences of that nature,
but I think as the government has had lots to do with
promoting veterinary medicine. In what way?
Well, they had moving pictures that would
promote the profession and then they became the
old Bureau of Animal Industries grew and grew and
grew and they had these animal disease research
facilities like Plum Island and the one in Iowa and
whatnot. So, it's just a question of people
becoming better acquainted with what the
profession had to offer.
And I think a lot of it, too, is that they feel like
when they graduate they're going to be
independent. Yeah. They won't be working for
General Electric or the telephone company or
something like that, but they'll be out
independent and everybody likes independence. I
think that's a big part of it too. The first woman
came, the first woman student came to Texas A&M
School of Vet Medicine at 1963, right before you
retired, and now they comprise about one-third of
the student body. I was wondering what your
feelings were when the first woman came. What did
you think of that? Do you remember? No, I remember,
I remember her, and
what was her name? I don't remember. I've got it
written down, but I don't know. She was a very
attractive, black-headed girl, married, and I
think went into practice with her husband in
Lubbock. I believe that's right. But anyway, I
never had her in class, and
I don't know, it
was kind of strange to me. that would have women
wanting to practice veterinary medicine, and
some of them go into large animal practice, which
is pretty hard for me to understand. Of course,
they want equal rights now, and apparently
they'll have to register for the draft like
everybody else, so if they want equal rights,
they'll have to pay penalties.
What was the general faculty, do you remember what
the general faculty response to admitting women
was back in the early 1960s?
What did you and your colleagues think about
having women students?
I don't think we resented it too much. We thought it
was strange that they'd want to take veterinary
medicine, but if they wanted it, I don't think we
resented it. In other words, you don't think there
was really much decision? No. Not much dissent.
because and then it was just what two or three came
along there and didn't amount to much, but now I
guess it's uh they just take their knocks along
with the with the boys. Do you know, I haven't been
able to find out much information about this, I
know that the first women came in 1963, but how'd
they make the decision to allow them to enter? That
I don't know. I don't know where I can talk to you
about that. I don't really know that either. I
guess
about that time, about that time they removed the
restrictions of taking women into A&M. It became
coeducational. So I guess it just had to be part of
that. Now that's just my opinion. I don't know that
that's really the case, but if the university
wanted to go co-educational, veterinary
medicine couldn't say no. What did you think of the
quality of these first women students? They were
good. As far as I know, as I say, I didn't have-
Didn't you ever have, I mean, two years later you
resigned, so you didn't have a woman in any class?
No, I didn't have anything but seniors. Okay,
okay, right. And consequently, they got up to meet
this first one, I think graduated the next year.
66? Yeah. I believe.
A woman in a previously all-male setting must have
had some impact on the School of Veterinary
Medicine. Well, it wasn't apparent. There wasn't
enough of them while I was out there for it to be
apparent.
Okay, I'd like to, now that we're talking about
women, I'd like to switch to another topic, and
that is concerning blacks in veterinary
medicine. We have a number of blacks on campus
today, and I'm rather surprised, well, I'd like
your opinion on this. I don't want to
editorialize. I'd like your opinion on this. Why
are there so few blacks in veterinary medicine? Do
you have an idea on them? I had never thought about
it. No.
At one time, down at Prairie View, they had a
department of veterinary medicine. And the head
of that department down there was a good
veterinarian and a fine man.
But the blacks would go there and just, they'd have
a few courses in veterinary medicine and they
didn't get a degree. And,
of course,
schools were segregated then,
and I can't answer your question. We didn't have
one when I was out there. I know, I know. It's a
difficult question, and today I don't know if
there's any blacks enrolled at all. Veterinary
medicine? I don't know if there are. There might be
one or two. They did have some. Uh-huh. They did
have some. Shortly after I retired, I know they had
some out there. Now, I think a lot of that, this is
not for publication, I think a lot of that was due to
insistence by the NAACP that Negroes go to A&M and
go into the veterinary school and invade every
area in the country. Now, whether they could cut
the mustard or not, the students were something
else,
but they did push them.